---
title: Plans For Winter 2017
date: 2017-01-05
---

Today was the first day of my final semester as an undergraduate at UofT,
beginning shortly after the start of the new year. While I'm not really one to
insist on formally pursuing new year's resolutions, on a shorter time scale I at
least have some plans for what I want to do over the course of the semester.

My first priority is to finalize my course selection for this semester. There
are several competing forces at play; in practice I will probably only take one
or two courses for credit (to save money, time, and also because I don't need
any more credits to graduate), and audit several others. Since this is my last
chance to take courses as an undergrad, I also feel a strong desire to learn as
much as I can. Combined with the fact that so many new and interesting courses
are being offered this semester, and that the lectures I'm interested in
conflict with each other in weird ways, I'm currently trying to solve a very
complicated maximum-weight
[independent set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independent_set_\(graph_theory\))
problem. My primary concern for this week and the next will be to figure out
the weights.

I'm currently planning on taking or auditing a few computer science theory grad
courses, on topics such as Proof Complexity, Impossibility Results in
Distributed Computing, and Private Data Analysis. Otherwise, I'm also
considering auditing some lectures on combinatorics to fill some gaps in my math
background, and if I have time I may also audit a course on set theory, just for
fun. There is also a new undergrad course on Advanced Algorithm Design being
offered this semester, which I plan to check out. I may also audit a course on
networks, if at least to balance out all of the theory I'm taking with something
a bit more practical.

I'm also hoping to see if I can do a bit of self-study on the side this
semester. Abstract algebra is a topic where I've picked up bits and pieces here
and there to study various applications, however I've been meaning to properly
learn algebra for a while. I plan to see how far I can get using Paolo Aluffi's
book *Algebra: Chapter 0*, which I'll probably write about more in future posts.
I also picked up a copy of Stasys Jukna's *Extremal Combinatorics With
Applications in Computer Science* (along with another book of his, *Boolean
Function Complexity*, which usually goes for about \$130 CAD, but that I somehow
managed to snag for \$20 on Amazon), which seems both interesting and useful.

Apart from studying and TAing, I hope to find some time to work on side projects
as well, and perhaps attend a hackathon or two. I want to travel for a hackathon
at least once before I graduate, so I might as well try doing that while the
clock is still ticking. I hope to spend some more time working on research this
semester as well.

Finally, I hope to write a bit more regularly during the next few months, which
primarily means updating this blog more frequently. I plan to mainly write about
things that I am studying, to assist with my own learning, as an excuse to
practice writing, and also because it's fun.

Let's see how my final semester as an undergrad goes!
