---
title: Aluffi's Algebra: Chapter 0: Chapter 1
date: 2017-01-07
---

One of my goals for this semester is to work through Paolo Aluffi's *Algebra:
Chapter 0*, and see how far I can get. I've been meaning to properly learn
abstract algebra for quite a while now; up to this point, my knowledge of
algebra consists of bits and pieces that I've picked up here and there, to
understand various applications: fundamental groups in algebraic topology,
categories and functors, monads in Haskell, and theorems concerning rings,
polynomials, and ideals, for an abstract linear algebra class.

For this reason, I've decided to go with Aluffi's algebra book, which is
supposed to provide a self-contained introduction to abstract algebra that is,
in the author's words, "suitable for upper-level undergraduate or beginning
graduate courses." One of the unique features of this book is that it uses
category theory to interweave separate algebraic topics right from the start,
rather than relegating a brief discussion of categories and functors to an
appendix. I, for one, am a fan of category theory, especially when it helps to
elucidate the connections between seemingly disparate topics in math.

Every undergraduate-level math text inevitably starts with a review of the
basics: sets, functions, relations, and all that. Aluffi goes a step further,
defining the basic language of categories that will be used throughout the book
to define and unify concepts involving groups, rings, modules, and other
algebraic objects. Since most of the topics in Chapter 1 simply reviewed
material that I had seen before, I mostly skimmed over this chapter, and quickly
glanced at most of the exercises to make sure that I knew at least the general
idea of how to solve them.

Two things struck me as I read the chapter. The first is that Aluffi didn't
choose to number the chapters of his books starting from zero. The other thing
that seemed a bit strange to me, at least at fist, was the omission of a proper
definition of functors. The word "functor" is briefly mentioned towards the end
of the chapter, in the section on universal properties, as being part of the
underlying formalism used to make concepts surrounding universal properties
rigorous. I would argue that, at this point, enough category-theoretic
terminology has been introduced to at least define functors, and to briefly
discuss diagrams, cones, limits, and all that. But I concede that this is not a
major omission; at this point in the text this level of formalism is not exactly
necessary, but it might be nice to have. Then again, this is a text on abstract
algebra, not category theory. For a thorough discussion of these topics, several
excellent books already exist, such as Steve Awodey's excellent book, aptly
titled *Category Theory*.

As I work through later chapters of this book, I may also post solutions to some
of the exercises. Though I want to be a bit careful how much I post, since I'm
sure that a fair number of professors use this book for their algebra classes,
and I don't want to spoil too many solutions (or mislead students with
potentially wrong answers).

For now though, I think I'm ready to dive into the next chapter, which starts
getting into the meat of the subject: groups!
